RHIDP-12611: Document the RHDH must-gather tool for diagnostics data collection (#2151)
redhat-developer/red-hat-developers-documentation-rhdh: modules/support_diagnostic-data-collection/con-diagnostic-data-types-and-collection-scope.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT

[id="diagnostic-data-types-and-collection-scope_{context}"]
= Diagnostic data types and collection scope

[role="_abstract"]
To minimize security risk and configure appropriate collection scope for your environment, review what diagnostic data the tool gathers by default and what additional data you can include for specific troubleshooting scenarios.

The {product-very-short} must-gather tool organizes data collection into default-enabled collectors and opt-in collectors.

== Default-enabled collectors

The following collectors run by default and you can exclude them using `--without-<collector>` flags to focus collection on relevant data for your deployment:

Platform collector::

> This collector collects cluster-level information including cluster version, node details, storage classes, and platform detection metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This collector collects cluster-level information including cluster version, and platform detection metadata.
```

These are not part of the platform collector.

Orchestrator collector::
This collector gathers workflow execution data, {rhoserverless-brand-name} resources, and Knative state for deployments by using the Orchestrator plugin.
This collector is useful when troubleshooting workflow-related issues.
If your deployment does not use Orchestrator functionality, you can exclude this collector to reduce collection time and output size.

Application data collector::
This collector collects pod logs, deployment configurations, service definitions, `ConfigMaps`, and persistent volume claims for {product-very-short} application components.
This core diagnostic information helps in nearly all troubleshooting scenarios.

Route and Ingress collector::
This collector gathers route definitions on {ocp-short} and ingress configurations on Kubernetes platforms.
This information is essential for troubleshooting external access issues and connectivity problems.

Namespace-inspect collector::
This collector performs cross-namespace resource discovery to identify {product-very-short} components distributed across many namespaces.
This is particularly useful in complex deployments where {product-very-short} resources span several namespaces.

> You can exclude this collector if you know all resources are in a single namespace.

Reviewer: Actually, this cross-namespace resource discovery is done by all the other collectors to detect RHDH and RHDH Operator instances. There is a `--namespaces` flag to limit collection to certain namespaces.
The namespace-inspect collector is different as it collects the core resources running in the namespaces detected by the previous collectors, so as to make it easier for Support teams to navigate the must-gather. It is recommended to not disable the namespace-inspect collector.

== Opt-in collectors

The following collectors do not run by default and you must explicitly enable them when needed:

Cluster-info collector::
This collector collects cluster-wide state information beyond the basic platform metadata.
Enable this collector when troubleshooting issues that might involve cluster-level configurations or resource constraints.
This collector increases collection time and output size, so enable it only when cluster-level diagnostics are needed.

Secrets collector::
This collector includes Kubernetes secrets in the diagnostic output with automatic redaction of sensitive values.
The tool redacts passwords, tokens, API keys, and other sensitive data while preserving the structure and keys for configuration troubleshooting.

> The tool generates a redaction report showing which fields it redacted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tool generates a redaction report showing which files it redacted.
```

> Enable secrets collection only when troubleshooting configuration issues that require seeing secret structure, and always review the output before sharing with support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable secrets collection only when troubleshooting configuration issues that require seeing secret structure, and always review the output before sharing with external teams.
```

Not only support.

Heap dumps collector::
This collector triggers memory snapshots from Node.js backend processes and collects the resulting heap dump files.
Heap dumps are large binary files that support engineers analyze to diagnose memory leaks, performance degradation, or out-of-memory errors.

> This collector requires that you configure backend containers with the `NODE_OPTIONS` environment variable including `--heapsnapshot-signal=SIGUSR2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This collector requires that you pay attention to the liveness probe configuration of the application containers.
```

No longer needed, but what's important is the liveness probe settings. I'll update the upstream docs accordingly.
